YSSY Changes (#29)
vatpac-technology/pilot-procedures: docs/local-procedures/Class C/sydney.md

--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"

## Taxiing

> There are two SMC positions at Sydney. SMC West controls aprons and taxiways west of RWY 16R/34L, while SMC east controls east of RWY 34L/16R.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two SMC positions at Sydney. SMC West controls aprons and taxiways west of RWY 16R/34L, while SMC East controls east of RWY 34L/16R.
```

    | PLUGA | GORTA | RIKNI | 8 | 

### STAR Route Discontinuities
Most STARs terminate with radar vectors from ATC and will generally produce a route discontinuity in the flight management system. **Do not delete the route discontinuity**, as doing so will cause the aircraft to track inappropriately. The dicontinuity exists because the aircraft does not know that it will receive vectors to final.

!!! warning "Important"  
    Some aircraft FMCs may insert a discontinuity after BOOGI, NASHO, or JAKLN. In most cases, these waypoints are followed by a point titled *(VECTORS)*. If your FMC generates a discontinuity instead of a VECTORS waypoint, do not delete the discontinuity. They will function the same.

### Sydney Director

> Sydney Director (SY-D_APP & SY-DE_APP) is a unique position responsible for providing vectors to final for inbound aircraft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sydney Director (SY-D_APP & SY-DE_APP) are unique positions responsible for providing vectors to final for inbound aircraft.
```

Reviewer: Just leaving the plural since there's two positions

On first contact with Director, you should report "RUNWAY XX IN SIGHT" if you can see your assigned runway, or "VISUAL" if you can see the ground/water. 

ATC can only clear you for an IVA when one of the below conditions has been met:
- you have your assigned runway in sight, or
- you are already established on the localiser/final approach course and are visual.

Therefore, if it important to report 'runway in sight' or 'visual' as soon as possible during IVAs.

!!! tip

>     If Director is not online, Approach will carry out the functions of the position.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If Director is not online, Approach will carry out the functions of the position. Report your assigned runway in sight as soon as possible.
```

Author: No worries; took it out because it's emphasised in the IVA section below, but good to have it twice anyway.

#### Requirements
To fly the IVA, pilots must report their assigned runway in sight to ATC. If established on the LOC/FAC, pilots may report visual instead.

!!! note  
    Reporting the runway in sight means that you are able to maintain visual reference to the runway along your intended flight path. If there is weather on your anticipated track that will obscure your visibility of the runway, do not report the runway in sight until you are certain you can maintain visual reference.

Pilots may use the ILS or GLS for lateral and vertical guidance when conducting an IVA.

Ensure you do not pass through your assigned runway centreline, even if you don't receieve a heading to join final on your base leg. The vector to final will not be greater than 30 degrees from the runway centreline.

Pilots must manage their speed on the base leg to ensure they do not overshoot the centreline. ATC approach speeds apply, and can be found on the relevant instrument approach chart.

> Other aircraft will be operating on the adjacent approach, and ATC will provide surveillance or vertical separation until cleared for an IVA. Traffic information will be provided if another aircraft is within 1NM on final. Pilots must respond to any TCAS resolution advisory accordingly, however TCAS traffic advisories are expected and do not require pilot action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other aircraft will be operating on the adjacent approach, and ATC will provide surveillance or vertical separation until cleared for an IVA. Traffic information will be provided if another aircraft is within 1NM on final. Pilots must respond to any TCAS resolution advisory accordingly.
```

Helicopters will be identified and then cleared for the BONDI 5 NORTHBOUND or SOUTHBOUND. Traffic information will be provided on any other helicopters operating on the route or for any other aircraft in the area (e.g. aircraft in Victor One).

!!! phraseology  

>     **XVZ**: "Sydney Approach, helicopter XVZ, Jibbon Point, A005, received Whiskey, request BONDI 5 Northbound"  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **XVZ**: "Sydney Approach, helicopter XVZ, Jibbon Point, `A005`, received Whiskey, request BONDI 5 Northbound"  
```

Helicopters intending to operate in one of the sectors must request clearance from the most appropriate TCU controller.

!!! phraseology  

>     **X3V**: "Departures, helicopter X3V, passing A008 on the Harbour Bridge 5 Outbound, request South Harbour Sector."  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **X3V**: "Departures, helicopter X3V, passing `A008` on the Harbour Bridge 5 Outbound, request South Harbour Sector."  
```

>     **SY DEP**: "X3V, Departures, identified, cleared South Harbour Sector."  
>     **X3V**: "Cleared South Harbour Sector, X3V."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **SY DEP**: "X3V, Departures, identified, onwards clearance South Harbour Sector."  
    **X3V**: "Onwards clearance South Harbour Sector, X3V."
```

Reviewer: Both of these are probably fine, this is the way it seems to be done IRL more often and what matches the SOPs

Author: Sounds good! Just to double check, for this PR I cross-referenced all info with official documentation (where I could find it), and noticed this example wasn't conformant with the FAC YSSY. Happy to deviate from the documentation though if that's how it's done IRL

<img width="1053" height="272" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a0e20145-366c-4f33-88f7-74a2418973e3" />
